That's us there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Perfect.
Okay, so just, uh, talking to us.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Awesome.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And I hear you tell everybody we're setting.
NOTE CONF
All right, everyone, the recording is live.
We're going to go ahead and get started.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to turn it over to Condren.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
To give a quick announcement.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
Hi, everyone.
NOTE CONF
I'm Catherine from type sig.
Type sig being the, uh, student society on programming languages
NOTE CONF
and theoretical computer science.
And this is a bit of a, an advertisement for
NOTE CONF
tuples, which is our student conference, uh, running at the
end of Flexible learning week.
NOTE CONF
So you should come and I'll try and convince you.
Um, what is tuples?
NOTE CONF
It's a student conference.
Um, which is.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Meaning it's meant for students like you and me.
NOTE CONF
Um, and what we've done is we've gathered 12 speakers
from across the UK to speak about theoretical computer science.
NOTE CONF
So you have we have two tracks, one on general
theory and the other one on programming languages.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we have speakers, 12 speakers, you know, from,
from all of these, um, over here.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you look at these words and you don't
know what they mean, that's totally fine.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we the goal of this conference is that we
introduce you to these things.
NOTE CONF
And even though some of the topics might be a
bit involved, um, we're trying to make it as accessible
NOTE CONF
as possible.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
An important thing is you can switch between the tracks
during the day.
NOTE CONF
So don't feel like you have to stick to one.
You can jump around depending on which talks you find
NOTE CONF
more interesting.
Um, to give you an example, um, we have one
NOTE CONF
speaker in the theory track, which is Christian.
Um, he will, uh, he's very interested in, uh, geometric
NOTE CONF
complexity theory, which I don't know much about, but if
you're interested in that, you could come to his talk.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we also have Thurston coming from Nottingham who
will talk about fancy types.
NOTE CONF
So types that type systems that go a bit beyond,
uh, the type systems you'd find in Java or other
NOTE CONF
languages.
And what can we do with them?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So, um, when will it happen?
NOTE CONF
23rd February at the end of Flexible Learning Week.
Um, from about 10 a.m., maybe a bit earlier till
NOTE CONF
530 in nucleus.
In fact, one of the lecture theatres is going to
NOTE CONF
be this one.
So please come and then you can get your tickets
NOTE CONF
there.
It costs £5, but if you use that code that
NOTE CONF
I've added this morning for you guys, uh, you can
get £1 off.
NOTE CONF
Um, and in that ticket price, you get catering for
the whole day.
NOTE CONF
So you get lunch, you get coffee and snacks.
So even if you just want food, you can come
NOTE CONF
for that.
It's quite cheap.
NOTE CONF
Um, and you also get access to all the talks
and types of branded items.
NOTE CONF
So you will give out conference tote bags and stickers
and stuff.
NOTE CONF
So that should be.
Should be fun.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Terrific.
Thanks so much.
NOTE CONF
Uh, while I'm switching over to my laptop, I'll make
one more appeal for anyone who came in late.
NOTE CONF
Does anybody have one of the HDMI to Mac dongles?
I have one of the old Mac pros.
NOTE CONF
If anybody happens to have that, it'd be a hero.
If you suddenly find it, simply interrupt the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Someone does.
Let me see if this works.
NOTE CONF
I have one of the old ones.
Thank you so much.
NOTE CONF
This might be it.
Well, I will.
NOTE CONF
I get plugged in here.
Uh, you can tell I'm not Fiona.
NOTE CONF
I think she sent out an email about it.
Possibly.
NOTE CONF
Uh, she's in Glasgow today.
I think attending some sort of workshop or conference or
NOTE CONF
something like this.
So I'm the Ta for the course.
NOTE CONF
My name is Colton.
I'm a PhD student at the university.
NOTE CONF
I studied generative AI.
I used the to the Java class though back at
NOTE CONF
my previous university.
So Fiona asked if I could jump in.
NOTE CONF
And so I'm going to be giving the lecture today.
And I have a cold.
NOTE CONF
I haven't lectured this course before.
And my laptop doesn't plug into this.
NOTE CONF
So I found all of this out this morning.
And so I'm trying to do my best to still
NOTE CONF
put on a great lecture.
So let me see if this works.
NOTE CONF
Um, if it does, that'll be phenomenal because I won't
have to use my friend's laptop.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but Let's see.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Thank you so much.
Thank you so much for the for the adaptor.
NOTE CONF
Come grab it from me after.
So, yes.
NOTE CONF
Flexible learning.
The only announcement I have to make is flexible learning
NOTE CONF
week is next week.
That means no lecture, no tutorials, no labs, no no
NOTE CONF
nothing.
There is nothing going on with the course as far
NOTE CONF
as an in-person commitment.
So don't don't show up.
NOTE CONF
No one, no one will be around.
Hope everyone has some fun plans by the way I
NOTE CONF
see.
Definitely not revising.
NOTE CONF
We've all been there.
Hope everyone has safe travels.
NOTE CONF
If you're if you're leaving Edinburgh.
Okay, so I noticed that screen was flickering.
NOTE CONF
If that keeps happening, I'll switch, but I'll go for
it for now.
NOTE CONF
So today we're talking about the stack versus the heap.
And if you've studied any data structures at all, you
NOTE CONF
might be thinking, oh boy, exciting.
We're going to be talking about data structures and algorithms
NOTE CONF
today because you will have possibly heard the stack and
the heap are both data structures.
NOTE CONF
But I am sorry to disappoint that this is just
memory today.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to be talking about different memory structures
that Java uses under the hood in order to store
NOTE CONF
everything that you do while you code.
Up until now, I think Fiona has talked to you
NOTE CONF
about memory, specifically with storing objects.
And so today we're going to go into a bit
NOTE CONF
more depth on what actually happens when you store objects
versus normal variables.
NOTE CONF
They get stored in two different places.
And how knowing this can help you avoid what we
NOTE CONF
call side effects when you're working with objects.
So this is a bit lower level than the just
NOTE CONF
syntactical Java you've been learning throughout the course, but it's
actually quite interesting and something you're going to run into
NOTE CONF
fairly often.
So so far you've learned that objects have a static
NOTE CONF
compile time type defined inside a class.
So when you create an object in Java, you have
NOTE CONF
to tell Java what type of object it is.
These are then instances of these classes are created at
NOTE CONF
runtime and you've learned all about the new keyword.
Fiona tells me so that creates a new object.
NOTE CONF
And as we see, the new keyword is very important
for knowing how it gets assigned in memory.
NOTE CONF
And then objects are reference types, so they get passed
by reference.
NOTE CONF
What that means is unlike an integer or a primitive
type, where if you pass the integer one to a
NOTE CONF
function, it's getting an actual value of one.
But if you pass an object to a function, it's
NOTE CONF
not getting the actual object, it's getting a reference to
where that object lives in memory.
NOTE CONF
This is a little tricky to wrap your head around,
but we're going to go over some examples today where
NOTE CONF
hopefully it'll make more sense.
Okay, so I think I think the circle class has
NOTE CONF
either come up before in the course or has been
teased that it's going to come up in the course,
NOTE CONF
but we're going to talk all about it today, and
then we're going to use it to write some code.
NOTE CONF
So the circle class is is public.
It has a constructor that takes a double radius.
NOTE CONF
That would be the radius of the circle.
We have a get area method that returns a double
NOTE CONF
which would be the area of a circle.
So pi r squared.
NOTE CONF
So with the radius we can compute that.
We have a void method called enlarge that can increase
NOTE CONF
the radius of the circle by a certain factor.
And then we have our Boolean equals method, which all
NOTE CONF
objects typically have, which gives you a way to compare
if two of the same type of object are equal.
NOTE CONF
And you'll notice at the bottom right there, the equals
method is going to return true if means if and
NOTE CONF
only if if and only if A is a circle
of the same size.
NOTE CONF
So this particular equals method is not going to check
if the two objects are pointing to the exact same
NOTE CONF
spot in memory.
This equals method is going to be checking.
NOTE CONF
Do two circles have the same radius.
So even if they're stored separately, if they have the
NOTE CONF
same radius we're going to consider them equal.
We'll get some practice with this in a second.
NOTE CONF
We'll get some practice with this right now.
So I'm going to erase all of this.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to have a go.
You can see this right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah I'm going to have a have a go at
writing this from scratch, because I think Fiona usually does
NOTE CONF
some live coding.
I'm going to have a go with that.
NOTE CONF
And also, the lecture today isn't that long.
So I'm actually going to walk through the code because
NOTE CONF
there aren't a ton of slides.
And so we're going to go through this.
NOTE CONF
And yeah if anyone has any questions at any point
feel free to throw your hand up.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So a couple of things we're going to do here.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to make a circle called C1.
And that's going to equal a new circle.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to give that a radius of one.
And then I'm going to print out the area.
NOTE CONF
Actually I guess I could print the radius.
I'll print out the radius of the circle.
NOTE CONF
By the way the circle class is right here.
And the reason that I can access the radius variable
NOTE CONF
is because it's public here.
So if this if this were private, which you often
NOTE CONF
see when you're writing Java, a lot of the class
variables will be private.
NOTE CONF
If I switch that to private.
Notice how I get an error.
NOTE CONF
I can't call the radius like this if it's private,
because private means it's only accessible inside the class.
NOTE CONF
I could still call get area because that's a public
method on the class.
NOTE CONF
It's public, but I want to show you how the
radius gets manipulated.
NOTE CONF
So I could either write a get radius method that
would return the radius, or just to make things easy
NOTE CONF
for today.
I'm going to make this class variable public, which means
NOTE CONF
I can access it here.
Radius like that.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So then if I go ahead and.
NOTE CONF
Compile and run this, I get.
And hopefully you can see that I get 1.0.
NOTE CONF
I can try to make it a little bigger, but
then it gets tough to see.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So I'm going to make another circle.
NOTE CONF
So circle C2 equals new circle.
And I'm going to give this one a radius of
NOTE CONF
two.
And then I will print out C2 is radius same
NOTE CONF
as the first one.
And then I'm going to make a third circle.
NOTE CONF
And this is where we get a little bit more
interesting.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to make circle C3.
I'm going to set that equal to C1 like that.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to print out C3 dot radius
like so.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to run this.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And notice what we get.
So radius of one radius of two for the two
NOTE CONF
circles that I made from scratch.
So because I used the new keyword, those get assigned
NOTE CONF
to a place in memory.
And then I made C3 by setting an equal to
NOTE CONF
C1.
And we see that C3 is radius is one, so
NOTE CONF
the same as circle one.
Hopefully that makes sense.
NOTE CONF
We're saying that they're equal.
So now we're going to test a few equalities.
NOTE CONF
So if we say.
Circle one equals equals circle two versus circle one dot
NOTE CONF
equals circle two.
And then I'll do the same thing for circle one
NOTE CONF
and circle three.
So circle one equals circle three.
NOTE CONF
And print out circle one dot equals circle three.
Like this.
NOTE CONF
Take a second and think about what these might produce.
Well I run it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so if I print out circle one equals equals
circle two.
NOTE CONF
Remember the equals equals operator is checking if these objects
are actually the same.
NOTE CONF
If they point to the same spot in memory, they
don't.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because I've created two new circles with the new keyword.
NOTE CONF
Every time you use the new keyword, you're creating a
new spot in memory for that object.
NOTE CONF
So because those are two different spots in memory, I've
used new two different times.
NOTE CONF
Those objects are not the same.
If I say to see 1.2. equals is using this
NOTE CONF
method here that we've defined where all we're checking are.
If the radii are the same radii, radius is if
NOTE CONF
they're the same.
If they're the same, the circles are the same.
NOTE CONF
So one and two are not equal, so that also
returns false.
NOTE CONF
But now when I print out C1 equals equals c3
that returns true.
NOTE CONF
Those are the same object in memory.
Because when we created circle three we didn't use the
NOTE CONF
new keyword.
We set it equal to C1.
NOTE CONF
C1 already exists in memory.
So C3 just points to that same spot in memory
NOTE CONF
that C1 occupies.
Therefore when we compare them with equals equals they're true.
NOTE CONF
They're the same exact object in memory.
And naturally if we use dot equals that also is
NOTE CONF
going to return true because they're the exact same object
in memory, meaning they both have the same radius of
NOTE CONF
one.
Now we're going to do one other interesting thing.
NOTE CONF
I am going to.
I'm going to enlarge C1.
NOTE CONF
By a factor of two.
Now, I'll take a second to think about what might
NOTE CONF
happen here.
I'll run the code.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Actually I should.
NOTE CONF
I should probably print out the radiuses again after this.
So let me print out, and it'll be more interesting
NOTE CONF
if we do this.
Yeah, let's do that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So ignore ignore these first three.
NOTE CONF
That was that was originally the radii of the three
circles.
NOTE CONF
So now I've in the large C1 by a factor
of two.
NOTE CONF
And remember our enlarge method that just takes the radius
and multiplies it by whatever factor I've passed in.
NOTE CONF
So I've effectively changed the radius of circle one from
1 to 2.
NOTE CONF
I've multiplied it by two.
So now the radius of all three circles is two.
NOTE CONF
But if I compare c1 to c2 this line down
here line 18.
NOTE CONF
If I compare them it's still false.
Because remember the equals equals operator is just checking if
NOTE CONF
they're occupying the same space in memory if they're the
same object.
NOTE CONF
So these are still two different objects.
So even though the radii are the same they're not
NOTE CONF
the same object.
But the one that has changed is c1 c2.
NOTE CONF
They may not be the same object in memory, but
they do have the same radius now.
NOTE CONF
They now both have a radius of two.
So the one thing that's changed is that has flipped
NOTE CONF
from false to true, because they now have the same
radius.
NOTE CONF
C1 and C3 are still the same circle.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
They both got enlarged.
So they're both still true.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we've done all that.
That's that's a little taster of the theory behind what
NOTE CONF
we're talking about today.
Stack versus heap.
NOTE CONF
So so far memory has been just this abstract space
where we store things.
NOTE CONF
But actually it's not just memory.
There's two types stack and there's heap in the Java
NOTE CONF
virtual machine manages both of these.
So I'm not going to write this code I don't
NOTE CONF
know why it's a little small.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
I think this might make the most sense.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we'll start with stack memory.
There's stack and there's heap.
NOTE CONF
Stack is transient.
Transient meaning temporary.
NOTE CONF
So we store local variables on the stack.
Objects will get stored on the heap and we'll talk
NOTE CONF
about that more in a second.
So in this code example here we're in the main
NOTE CONF
method we have an int called jack money.
We have another int called jack target and we have
NOTE CONF
a double called weeks.
None of those are objects.
NOTE CONF
Those are all primitive types.
So they all go on the stack.
NOTE CONF
And we see that represented here on the right.
So Jack money and its value jack target is value
NOTE CONF
weeks and its value that all gets stored on the
stack.
NOTE CONF
And they're all highlighted in blue.
And there's a little call out to the right saying
NOTE CONF
a stack frame.
This is a fancy way of simply saying that any
NOTE CONF
time you're inside of a method, all of the variables
in that method get their own stack frame in the
NOTE CONF
stack.
So I'll show you an example in a second where
NOTE CONF
we have more than one stack frame, And just at
the bottom here.
NOTE CONF
This would also include things like the main method has
the args parameter passed into it function arguments.
NOTE CONF
Those would also get stored on the stack in the
stack frame, as well as the return address if someone
NOTE CONF
if another function called this one, but we're omitting those
for now for simplicity.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so here's what I was just mentioning.
Here's a second method called calc weeks that has two
NOTE CONF
arguments.
Int money and int target.
NOTE CONF
And then two doubles sweets and red money.
And those are in a different method.
NOTE CONF
So those get a different frame on the stack.
Hopefully that all makes sense so far inside of a
NOTE CONF
method.
Any primitive variable types not objects.
NOTE CONF
They get a place on the stack and there are
frames separating the variables that are in each method on
NOTE CONF
the stack, and they're highlighted in different shades of blue
here.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So you might be thinking, great, why do I care.
NOTE CONF
So the stack is not unlimited sized.
It's a finite amount of memory on your computer.
NOTE CONF
So you can fill it up.
And if you do fill it up, you've probably written
NOTE CONF
code with a bug in it and your computer will
crash.
NOTE CONF
Well, Java will attempt to stop your computer from crashing
by crashing itself, but you can actually kind of mess
NOTE CONF
your computer up if you accidentally overflow the stack.
And so I don't know if you've talked about recursion
NOTE CONF
at all yet in the course, but you're going to
either get to it now or in a future term,
NOTE CONF
or you've already talked about it.
But recursion is where a function, a method, calls itself,
NOTE CONF
and it can call itself as many times as needed
until it returns the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
You'll often see this with things like summing a number
or doing a factorial, for example.
NOTE CONF
So like ten factorial is ten times nine times eight.
Rather than writing that all out or using a for
NOTE CONF
loop, you can do a clever recursive function call that
calls itself with one less number each time and adds
NOTE CONF
it all up.
It's a really cool process, but if you mess up
NOTE CONF
in recursion, what often happens is it's going to run
an infinite number of times because you've not ended the
NOTE CONF
loop correctly, as it were.
And so in this case, if n gets very large
NOTE CONF
or you make a mistake, you get a stack overflow.
And this is literally the namesake of Stack Overflow.
NOTE CONF
The programming help website that you've probably all seen.
So it's that's a joke on if you've made a
NOTE CONF
mistake while you're programming, you could literally overflow your stack.
And that's an error that will crash your program and
NOTE CONF
your computer.
If the recursion is too deep.
NOTE CONF
As it says here, you can actually, um, Set the
amount of stack memory that Java is going to use
NOTE CONF
on your computer, which is kind of cool.
I've done that before.
NOTE CONF
There's really, really never a need for it.
But if you ever wanted to, you can look that
NOTE CONF
up on Stack Overflow.
You can change your stack memory.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so local variables go on the stack.
The heap gets objects.
NOTE CONF
So let's talk a bit about that.
Now as opposed to where we were just using ints
NOTE CONF
and doubles and other primitive types in the last example.
Now we're going to add the heap with objects.
NOTE CONF
So here we're making a car mycar.
We're setting it equal to new car.
NOTE CONF
Here's the single most.
This is the single most important thing you have to
NOTE CONF
remember about when to store something on the heap.
If you say new in your code, it's going on
NOTE CONF
the heap.
That's the rule of thumb, and that's the easiest way
NOTE CONF
to remember it.
If you've written new meaning, you're creating a new object
NOTE CONF
that's going to get stored on the heap.
The new keyword literally means allocate new memory for me
NOTE CONF
on the heap.
So that's what you're doing when you say that.
NOTE CONF
And so in this case we create a variable mycar
and we say new.
NOTE CONF
Now here's here's the tricky bit.
The variable itself that you made in this case mycar.
NOTE CONF
The mycar variable that gets stored on the stack.
Because that's just a local variable like any of the
NOTE CONF
others that you've made.
But instead of having a value like in this case
NOTE CONF
the variable gas has the value 20.
And we see that on our stack, the variable my
NOTE CONF
car is an object because we've said new.
And so there's an arrow here that points to the
NOTE CONF
heap where the values of the car then reside.
So that's the difference.
NOTE CONF
With an object it's going to be a pointer.
We call it in the C programming language.
NOTE CONF
It's called a called a pointer.
In Java we probably just call it a reference.
NOTE CONF
My car is on the stack, but it's referencing an
object that's in the heap in memory.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what happens if I make another variable like
I did in my code example?
NOTE CONF
So in my code example I had C1 and I
set that equal to C3.
NOTE CONF
I didn't use the new keyword.
So here's the same example.
NOTE CONF
We say car your car equals my car right.
So first step did we use the new keyword.
NOTE CONF
We did not.
So that means we are not going to create any
NOTE CONF
new memory on the heap.
So we shouldn't be adding a second frame or a
NOTE CONF
second chunk of variables for a new car, because we
didn't say new.
NOTE CONF
So okay, we don't have to make any changes to
the heap.
NOTE CONF
We know that for sure because we didn't say new,
but we are dealing with objects so that your car
NOTE CONF
variable.
As you can see by, the arrow references the same
NOTE CONF
object in memory as my car references.
So there are two separate variables my car and your
NOTE CONF
car.
They both live on the stack in.
NOTE CONF
The value of each of them is a reference to
the same object in memory.
NOTE CONF
So back to my example of the circles.
That's why when we enlarged circle one, circle three also
NOTE CONF
would get enlarged because they were referring.
Well I guess I enlarged circle two to show that
NOTE CONF
they would all be the same.
If I had enlarged circle one.
NOTE CONF
Circle three would enlarge two because they're the same circle,
they're pointing to the exact same space.
NOTE CONF
So that's what I was sort of demonstrating in that
first code example.
NOTE CONF
And then this is seeing it on paper.
By contrast to this example where we did not use
NOTE CONF
the new keyword.
Here's an example where we do use the new keyword.
NOTE CONF
So all I've changed here.
The only thing that's changed is now instead of your
NOTE CONF
car equalling my car, your car equals a new car.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Step one.
Did we use the new keyword?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So that means we have to go to the heap
NOTE CONF
and we have to put a new object there.
So that's what we've done in this case.
NOTE CONF
And then the other car doesn't reference my car.
It references its own separate car in the heap.
NOTE CONF
So in this case they would be distinct.
And the difference is solely on that new keyword.
NOTE CONF
That's how you know.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So this can get tricky for a number of reasons.
And I'm going to try to demonstrate that.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll look at another pretty interesting code example.
So in in this case, and this might be what
NOTE CONF
I have the code for.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let me just run the code for this.
Let me write the code for this.
NOTE CONF
I think it'll be more interesting that way.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So good.
And let me erase this.
NOTE CONF
I need to get it to.
Add one.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So here we have some code.
NOTE CONF
And this is passing around an array.
So in the main the main method here we're creating
NOTE CONF
an array the values of zero and one.
We're calling add one on that array which we have
NOTE CONF
the add one method up here.
And then afterwards we're just printing out um the values
NOTE CONF
of the array.
So it looks it looks pretty straightforward.
NOTE CONF
But what does everybody think this is going to print
out I have.
NOTE CONF
Oh, wait, this reminds me Fiona does pets of the
lecture, which I have.
NOTE CONF
She sent them to me.
This is lucky.
NOTE CONF
I think I read in the email that lucky is
actually blind, has some trouble sitting, but is perfect.
NOTE CONF
So this is lucky.
Shout out Lucky's owner.
NOTE CONF
And this is.
This is Willow who is just absolutely lovely.
NOTE CONF
Thanks for sending in your pets.
Please keep sending in your pets.
NOTE CONF
You can email them to Fiona and they'll make it
into lecture.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay, so on the clap you'll see this.
NOTE CONF
I'll put the code back up so you can see
the code.
NOTE CONF
But you've got five options for what you think this
is going to print.
NOTE CONF
So let me give you 30 to 60s to make
your guesses.
NOTE CONF
Yes, yes.
Everyone got that?
NOTE CONF
Here's the code again.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're very torn.
That's great.
NOTE CONF
Uh, here's here's what it'll actually be.
All right.
NOTE CONF
One, one.
So slight majority.
NOTE CONF
Got that?
What's happening here?
NOTE CONF
We're creating.
And notice how there was a big split.
NOTE CONF
This is this is a confusing topic and one that's
very important to understand.
NOTE CONF
And these are called side effects.
The the name of what I'm showing you right now
NOTE CONF
is a side effect.
It's not actually clear what it's going to print.
NOTE CONF
It's not straightforward as seeing it all in in one
method because we're passing by reference.
NOTE CONF
And so this is a side effect of that.
So I've created an array zero one.
NOTE CONF
Okay straightforward.
We've passed that to the add one function sorry method
NOTE CONF
method in Java.
So A comes up here and we're taking the first
NOTE CONF
value and we're incrementing it by one.
Remember objects which arrays are objects just like a car.
NOTE CONF
Just like circle they're passed by reference.
So when we send a up to the add one
NOTE CONF
method, it has the actual reference to where that array
lives in memory.
NOTE CONF
So when it goes and updates this by incrementing the
first value by one, it's literally changing that in the
NOTE CONF
heap in the memory.
So when we come back down to the main method,
NOTE CONF
and we go ahead and print that out.
We get one one.
NOTE CONF
It actually updated because the A that's referenced here is
the same A that was referenced up here because we
NOTE CONF
passed it by reference.
So it actually gets changed in memory and its value
NOTE CONF
is actually different.
Okay everyone following that.
NOTE CONF
So far we have two other ways we can look
at this.
NOTE CONF
So now instead of saying an array and incrementing the
first value I'm going to set this equal to a
NOTE CONF
new int array.
A value two.
NOTE CONF
All I've changed is that sending it to a new
array of value two.
NOTE CONF
Now what's returned.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We got a good split again.
Let's run it and see.
NOTE CONF
Zero one.
Let's see what everyone said again.
NOTE CONF
Close.
We got it.
NOTE CONF
But close.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
People are discussing it.
This one.
NOTE CONF
I think this one is confusing after the one that
we just saw.
NOTE CONF
But let me try to explain it.
So in the last one, we manipulated the actual memory
NOTE CONF
that the array Occupied in the heat.
So in both places it was referencing the same thing.
NOTE CONF
And so it actually got updated.
Remember what I said when we used the new keyword?
NOTE CONF
The new keyword creates a new section on the heap.
So now we're not talking about the array that existed
NOTE CONF
originally.
We have that one here, but we're making an entirely
NOTE CONF
new one down here on the heap.
Then we're creating a local variable, an array.
NOTE CONF
And we're setting that equal to that new section on
the heap.
NOTE CONF
So here's our old one up here.
Here's the old array.
NOTE CONF
But now instead of changing this one, we've made a
whole new one entirely separate.
NOTE CONF
And it would be equal to zero zero because we
didn't initialise it.
NOTE CONF
But then the method doesn't do anything else.
It just returns.
NOTE CONF
We never touched the top one.
We never touched it at all.
NOTE CONF
We just made an entirely separate one and then did
nothing with it.
NOTE CONF
In fact, in IntelliJ my I'm using VS code in
IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
If you have all the things turned on that tell
you stuff about your code, it would actually grey an
NOTE CONF
array out here.
It would grey it out.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if anyone's writing it, but it'll literally
grey this out because you never used it.
NOTE CONF
You made a variable and then never did anything with
it at all.
NOTE CONF
So we print zero one.
Nothing happens.
NOTE CONF
We just print the original array.
The the one that we pass in is not not
NOTE CONF
changed at all.
Not updated in any way whatsoever.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully I'm blowing your mind a bit.
It'll make more sense once you do some examples.
NOTE CONF
I think the assignments, homeworks, etc..
Tutorials, labs.
NOTE CONF
We've got a lot of this, so you'll definitely be
an expert by the time you go through it a
NOTE CONF
few times.
Now last but not least, I have one more.
NOTE CONF
I have one more.
So if instead of this I'm going to return.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to return an array and then I need
to change this, returning it into a I need semicolon.
NOTE CONF
And then I need to say a equals I think
right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now what have I done.
NOTE CONF
I'm returning I'm returning the array.
And I'm setting a equal to that array down here.
NOTE CONF
So I've changed what the add one method actually does.
So one last time.
NOTE CONF
What are we getting here.
Okay okay.
NOTE CONF
We have somewhat of a consensus.
Let's see if you're all right.
NOTE CONF
It'd be awesome if it was just not that one
at all.
NOTE CONF
No, you're exactly right.
You're exactly right.
NOTE CONF
In this case, for anyone who didn't get this one,
or just so you understand it, last time in the
NOTE CONF
previous example, I made a new place on the heap
for this new array and then did absolutely nothing with
NOTE CONF
it.
But in this case, I've made a new place on
NOTE CONF
the heap and then I'm taking that.
So it's zero zero.
NOTE CONF
I've made this new array that's zero zero.
And then I'm taking that and literally passing it back
NOTE CONF
to the method that called it by returning it and
then setting a equal to that.
NOTE CONF
So in this case I've replaced a originally referenced the
first array in memory.
NOTE CONF
But now on line nine I'm saying okay, a you're
not referencing that spot in memory anymore.
NOTE CONF
A is referencing the new array that I just made
in the method up there.
NOTE CONF
Makes sense.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Good job getting the last one.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Where are my slides?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
All of that was this example.
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
She had these all on the slides, but I wanted
to write it out.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So side effects everything we just saw there that, like
NOTE CONF
I said at the beginning, that is all what we
call side effects.
NOTE CONF
Because a lot of programmers don't really ever learn the
nuances of what you just saw.
NOTE CONF
And this can be a huge source of bugs and
errors in code, both in school and and in industry.
NOTE CONF
This happens all the time.
So there's precautions we can take against this by making
NOTE CONF
objects immutable.
So that means once you create them, you can't change
NOTE CONF
them.
So they might get assigned a space on the heap.
NOTE CONF
And then you make them you mark them as immutable
so you can't actually update them at all.
NOTE CONF
Whatever they start as they are staying, whatever that was
forever.
NOTE CONF
Circle and car were mutable.
We could change them in memory because we did.
NOTE CONF
We saw some examples of that.
There's some fancy things you can do with immutability.
NOTE CONF
I think these might come up later in the course,
but we're not we're not going to look at them
NOTE CONF
just now.
Just know that that is something you can do.
NOTE CONF
You can mark things as immutable, cannot be changed.
If you do that.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to worry about side effects.
But why does Java even do this at all?
NOTE CONF
It's because it's really convenient to pass an object all
around your code base.
NOTE CONF
It could visit 50, 101,000 methods in some production code
bases, and to be able to update that object as
NOTE CONF
it flies around your code base is actually really convenient
and allows you a lot more positives than negatives, as
NOTE CONF
long as you're careful and know what you're doing.
Okay, so we've now established that objects, in addition to
NOTE CONF
everything we talked about on the first slide of lecture,
reside on the heap, we've we've now established that okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
The stack I mentioned was transient temporary it the stack
NOTE CONF
variables only exist while the code is in that method,
if that makes any sense.
NOTE CONF
So if you're in the main method we make we
make our stack variables.
NOTE CONF
Then we go off to some other method.
That method is going to come back to the main
NOTE CONF
method.
So we keep those we keep that stack variable alive.
NOTE CONF
But then we go off into some other method.
It makes its own stack frame puts its variables in
NOTE CONF
there.
Once we return from that other method, the stack variables
NOTE CONF
for that one just get erased.
Java does that automatically.
NOTE CONF
The heap does.
It works the same way.
NOTE CONF
So in our in our lovely second example where we
made this new array, did absolutely nothing with it and
NOTE CONF
then left the method.
Fiona might have this.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So in this case, we made something on the heap,
NOTE CONF
did nothing with it, and then left.
Java has a a function or a process called garbage
NOTE CONF
collection.
That's literally what it's called.
NOTE CONF
And if anything you create on the heap is not
used by your code.
NOTE CONF
Java garbage collects it, so Java erases it.
Why does Java do this?
NOTE CONF
Unlike the stack, which is temporary and takes up just
a little bit of space on your computer.
NOTE CONF
The heap is your computer's memory in a lot of
ways, so you are actually writing to your computer's memory.
NOTE CONF
Java manages this, but it's possible to actually write to
your computer's memory.
NOTE CONF
And so it's really important that we clean this up,
because if we don't say you wrote some buggy code
NOTE CONF
that made a million arrays on the heap, well, there's
a million arrays on your laptop's storage now and no
NOTE CONF
easy way to remove them.
You'd have to write some special code to go find
NOTE CONF
them all and erase them off of your computer.
So that would actually happen if Java didn't have this.
NOTE CONF
If anyone has used the lovely C language, C does
not garbage collect for you does not.
NOTE CONF
If you allocate memory for something on the heap, it'll
just live there forever unless you go and close it,
NOTE CONF
erase it at the end of your code.
So in C we have to manually do this.
NOTE CONF
We have to manually go in and find everything in
our code that we assign memory for and erase it
NOTE CONF
before the code ends.
So if you ever take C or know anything about
NOTE CONF
it, you know what I'm talking about.
But Java does that for us, which is very convenient.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I think this last example.
Well, I'll show you this and then I'm going to
NOTE CONF
hop into one more code example for the last couple
of minutes.
NOTE CONF
So in this case we've made an array of objects
because remember, we can do that too.
NOTE CONF
And so an array is an object.
And then objects are objects.
NOTE CONF
So what happens then.
Well when we make an array called some circles it's
NOTE CONF
an array.
So the name of the array goes in the stack.
NOTE CONF
We use the new keyword to make our array.
So that goes into the heap.
NOTE CONF
And it allocates in this case five null values.
Because an object that hasn't been initialised or instantiated is
NOTE CONF
null.
So when we make our circle array we make five
NOTE CONF
nulls.
And then we go in and we say okay the
NOTE CONF
third circle index two.
We're going to make that a new circle of value
NOTE CONF
ten.
We said new again.
NOTE CONF
If we say new we need new space in the
heap.
NOTE CONF
So we actually then in the heap make another new
section to store that circle.
NOTE CONF
And here's the tricky part.
Some circles has a reference to those five nulls.
NOTE CONF
But then that third circle now has its own reference
to where it lives in the heap.
NOTE CONF
That's why there's two arrows there.
So when we have objects in objects, nothing really changes.
NOTE CONF
There's just more arrows to think about.
Integer.
NOTE CONF
And yeah, this is generally showing the same thing.
Okay I'm going to try in the last seven minutes
NOTE CONF
I literally have one more code example.
And then we are done.
NOTE CONF
So we are going to do this.
I'm going to erase that and attempt to do it
NOTE CONF
myself again.
So we've got a circle array called some circles.
NOTE CONF
And that's going to equal a new circle array of
length five just like we showed.
NOTE CONF
And then I will say for I equals zero I
is less than some circles dot length I plus plus
NOTE CONF
we will say some circles at I is going to
be a new circle and I'm just going to give
NOTE CONF
them all a radius of of one like that.
This is just a simple example.
NOTE CONF
Now the question here becomes how do we copy this.
So you're writing some code and you want to copy
NOTE CONF
what you have for an integer is easy.
If you have five a equals five.
NOTE CONF
You can just say b is five, B is now
its own five.
NOTE CONF
But you can't do that with objects as we saw,
because if you set one equal to the other, they
NOTE CONF
reference the same spot in memory.
So how do we actually make a copy?
NOTE CONF
Well, what you might think is that we could say
infer for time's sake, I will copy this.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to say shallow copy.
There's a notion of a shallow versus a deep copy.
NOTE CONF
And you might be able to guess, um, what that's
going to mean.
NOTE CONF
So phi is zero.
I is less than, I'll say shallow copy dot length
NOTE CONF
i++.
And then we'll say a shallow copy at I equals
NOTE CONF
some circles at I.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what have I done here.
I'm saying that in our shallow copy array we're going
NOTE CONF
to iterate over it.
And we're just going to take whatever was in some
NOTE CONF
circles at that index.
And we're going to set that equal to our new
NOTE CONF
array's value at that position.
So we're going through and setting okay.
NOTE CONF
In our new array, we're taking each circle and we're
setting them as is the new one.
NOTE CONF
All right.
That's that's one way.
NOTE CONF
Can anybody think of a problem that could come up.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Those are interesting.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Yeah exactly.
And if you didn't hear that, all of the shallow
NOTE CONF
copy circles are just going to be pointers Ters to
the circles in some circles.
NOTE CONF
Is this bad?
Well, maybe yes, maybe no.
NOTE CONF
Depends on what you're trying to do.
This is a perfectly valid way to do it.
NOTE CONF
But what's the problem?
The problem is, if you go and update any of
NOTE CONF
the circles in some circle.
So say I took a circle, one in some circle
NOTE CONF
and enlarged it.
It's enlarging the circle in shallow copy two because they
NOTE CONF
both point to the same thing.
So if you change anything in some circles it's going
NOTE CONF
to affect all the circles in shallow copy.
And you probably don't want that.
NOTE CONF
If you're copying an array, you probably want a copy
of it to do something else with at least most
NOTE CONF
of the time.
So this shallow copy gets people all the time, and
NOTE CONF
then they have all sorts of side effects in their
code, and they don't know why it's happening.
NOTE CONF
So you can do this, but be careful.
So what do we want instead?
NOTE CONF
We want what we would call in programming a deep
copy, a true copy, an actual copy.
NOTE CONF
So to get that I'll say a circle array deep
copy equals new circle array five.
NOTE CONF
Nothing has changed.
I'll set up a for loop.
NOTE CONF
We'll iterate over it.
And now take a second and think about what I
NOTE CONF
might do here.
I think it's probably in the in the slides.
NOTE CONF
But if you haven't seen the slides yet think for
a second.
NOTE CONF
What would we actually want to do here instead of
just assigning the pointers the references?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yes, exactly.
NOTE CONF
New.
New is your friend when you're trying to make an
NOTE CONF
actual new copy of something.
So we can say deep copy at I equals new
NOTE CONF
circle.
And then remember we want them to be the same
NOTE CONF
as in some circles.
So the way that we would do that is we
NOTE CONF
would say, remember we pass circle a radius.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we can get the radii from some circles.
So this will be some circles at I dot's radius.
NOTE CONF
Let me make this smaller.
Let me just move this over and I need my
NOTE CONF
semicolon.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is doing the same thing but completely different.
Each deep copy circle is going to be not a
NOTE CONF
not a reference to some circles, but instead a reference
to its own brand new circle in memory that has
NOTE CONF
the same radii as all the circles and some circles.
So if I had made all of these radii different
NOTE CONF
in some circle, that would be reflected here.
So this is how to make a deep copy.
NOTE CONF
Now if I change any of the circles in some
circles, that's going to change the same circles in shallow
NOTE CONF
copy, but it's not going to change any of the
circles in deep copy.
NOTE CONF
Those deep copy ones are all their own spaces and
memory.
NOTE CONF
And so you've made what, this bottom one a true
copy.
NOTE CONF
This is an important concept that you'll get to practice
with a bit more in the coming weeks.
NOTE CONF
So I don't have any more questions.
I think the last thing is, yeah, garbage collector.
NOTE CONF
And here's here's a summary of today.
So we looked at the stack.
NOTE CONF
We looked at the heap.
We looked at how references work.
NOTE CONF
We looked at side effects.
We looked at garbage collection immutable and finally deep and
NOTE CONF
shallow copy.
So that's the working understanding of memory that you now
NOTE CONF
have.
You'll get some practice with this.
NOTE CONF
And that's all I've got for today.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Very.